README.md, before:

# Emotional Intelligence
:handshake: :heart: the kind of intelligence of which robots are incapable :no_entry: :robot:

## What Emotional Intelligence Is

Emotional intelligence is a person's ability to understand and manage their own emotions, and to understand and positively influence the emotions of others.

At least, thats the gist of it. Emotional Intelligence, sometimes referred to
as _Emotional Quotient_, or _EQ_ for short, is difficult to nail down with a comprehensive and precise definition. For many people, there will always be intangible components, and aspects that are hard to capture with words.

At thoughtbot, we have endeavored to define EI in a way that espouses our culture of inclusivity. We seek to continuously improve this definition, our
understanding of it, and our expression of it. Ultimately, we would like to  enact and inspire positive change in the world through our inclusive culture. This journey is not ours alone, and we invite you to contribute.

### Personal Competence

Personal Competence describes a person's self-awareness and self-management skills. It is the ability to stay aware of one's emotions, and how one's behavior is influenced by them. Personal competency focuses more on the self, rather than how the self interacts with others.

**Self Awareness** - the ability to accurately perceive one's own emotions, and maintaining awareness of them as they happen.

**Self Management** - as it relates to EI, is the ability to use awareness of one's emotions to stay flexible and positively direct one's behavior.

### Social Competence

Social Competence describes a person's social awareness and relationship management skills. It is the ability to understand other people’s moods, behavior, and motives in order to improve the quality of one's relationships.

**Social Awareness** - as it relates to EI, is one's ability to accurately detect someone else's emotional state. Accurate detection requires a state of empathy and compassion, and does not involve assumptions or judgements.

**Relationship Management** - within the scope of EI, is the ability to use awareness of emotional states to succssfully and positively manage interactions.

### EQ and IQ

IQ, or _Intelligence Quotient_, was once believed to be an indicator of performance and potential success in one's role. Over time, it has been demonstrated that job performance and success are much more closely linked to EQ. IQ is also regarded as a fixed trait, while EQ is a set of flexibile skills that can be grown over time.

EQ has a proven value for businesses. The fact that it can be grown and enhanced over time implies that businesses are burdened with opportunity cost when not developing a culture that is EQ focused.

### Leadership

Skilled leaders bring out the best in people. Emotional Intelligence is required to accurately understand the matrix of emotions, personality, and events that unfold in the workplace. Leaders who embrace and develop the skills for Emotional Intelligence have the ability to steer this complexity towards a positive and successful outcome.

## Why This Is Important to Us

At thoughtbot, we value human-centric work, and believe that the way we work can always be improved. We want to share what has worked well for us to inspire positive change in our world. We believe that Emotional Intelligence, along with other Diversity and Inclusion efforts, are key to inspiring a world with human-centered values.

Fostering Emotional Intelligence increases our desire to contribute. As adults, its likely that we will spend most of our lives at work. The actions we take, relationships we maintain, and interactions we have, strongly contribute to how our culture is defined and expressed as a whole. When asking ourselves what kind of culture we want to thrive in, what kind of changes we want to see, and what sort of actions we can take to get there, our answers come from our diversity and inclusion efforts, and the integration Emotional Intelligence into workplace culture.

It is our belief that a nurturing, compassionate, and safe environment inspires contribution. A culture of Emotional Intelligence facilitates such an environment by establishing a framework of values to follow. We believe the process of espousing these values will yield continuous opportunities to improve, grow, and positively influence the world around us. This process makes life less stressful, and work more rewarding and enjoyable.

### Consulting Skills

Consulting skills can also fall into that somewhat-intangible and hard-to-define area. Working towards a cultural framework for Emotional Intelligence helps us better define what we value as consultants. We believe that a framework for Emotional Intelligence helps us grow in the following skills:

* Communication
* Transparency
* Building Relationships with Stakeholders
* Building Trust
* Understanding Client Strategy
* Pair Programming
* Difficult Conversations
* Mentorship and Technical Leadership
* Sales
* Networking
* Self Evaluation
* Sharing Values

### The Bottom Line

The benefits of Emotional Intelligence regarding a business' operations and profitability are published and widely discussed. We believe this is not the primary motivator for developing and iterating on a culture of Emotional Intelligence. The "bottom line" for our endeavor is the establishment of a place folks are eager to come and contribute to each day. We are totally stoked that this also increases profits, but the win for us is the increase in the quality of our lives.

## How Might We

thoughtbot is continuously establishing new strategies and techniques to develop our Emotional Intelligence values. We use these to develop our personal EQ, and are always working to uncover more.

### Task Forces

Establishing Diversity and Inclusion Task Forces has allowed individual thoughtbotters to divide the work into smaller, more actionable areas of focus. Many people find this process very rewarding, and that it provides deeper meaning to the work we do. Diversity in collaboration yields new and synthesized strategies.

### NVC

> Our survival as a species depends on our ability to recognize that our well-being and the well-being of others are in fact one in the same.
>
>  -- Marshall B. Rosenberg, PhD, author of Nonviolent Communication

Non Violent Communication, or NVC, provides strategy and tactics for maintaining productive communication and connection under stress. It gifts us with a judgement free solution for reharmonizing with our values, and increases the quality of life in the workplace. Engaging with NVC helps develop Emotional Intelligence.

For more information, check out [the book](https://nonviolentcommunication.com/), or visit the [Center for Non Violent Communication](https://www.cnvc.org/).

### Meditation

This act of self care can clear up internal resources that we need to handle difficult conversations. Meditation can bring us closer to our truest selves, give a deeper insight into our emotions, and allow us to be more present when our emotions may affect our behaviors. Meditation can also help us recover from emotionally challenging situations, and more reliably redirect our behavior towards a successful outcome.

### Hiring

We aim to integrate our values from the start of our hiring pipeline.

### Interviews

Occassional interviews about individual people's thoughts and feelings on our EI/EQ efforts can provide new opportunities for improvement.

### Invitation

Maintaining a posture of invitation increases the liklihood of adoption of our values. We belive that the attribution of wrongness, judgement, or fault when sharing our values decreases the liklihood that our intentions are understood. 

We invite you to fork this repository, and contribute.

Commit message:

Add some Science, Add some Compassion

README.md, after:

# Emotional Intelligence
:handshake: :heart: the kind of intelligence of which robots are incapable :no_entry: :robot:

## What Emotional Intelligence Is

Emotional intelligence is a person's ability to understand and manage their own emotions, and to understand and positively influence the emotions of others.

At least, thats the gist of it. Emotional Intelligence, sometimes referred to
as _Emotional Quotient_, or _EQ_ for short, is difficult to nail down with a comprehensive and precise definition. For many people, there will always be intangible components, and aspects that are hard to capture with words.

At thoughtbot, we have endeavored to define EI in a way that espouses our culture of inclusivity. We seek to continuously improve this definition, our
understanding of it, and our expression of it. Ultimately, we would like to  enact and inspire positive change in the world through our inclusive culture. This journey is not ours alone, and we invite you to contribute.

### Personal Competence

Personal Competence describes a person's self-awareness and self-management skills. It is the ability to stay aware of one's emotions, and how one's behavior is influenced by them. Personal competency focuses more on the self, rather than how the self interacts with others.

**Self Awareness** - the ability to accurately perceive one's own emotions, and maintaining awareness of them as they happen.

**Self Management** - as it relates to EI, is the ability to use awareness of one's emotions to stay flexible and positively direct one's behavior.

### Social Competence

Social Competence describes a person's social awareness and relationship management skills. It is the ability to understand other people’s moods, behavior, and motives in order to improve the quality of one's relationships.

**Social Awareness** - as it relates to EI, is one's ability to accurately detect someone else's emotional state. Accurate detection requires a state of empathy and compassion, and does not involve assumptions or judgements.

**Relationship Management** - within the scope of EI, is the ability to use awareness of emotional states to succssfully and positively manage interactions.

### EQ and IQ

IQ, or _Intelligence Quotient_, was once believed to be an indicator of performance and potential success in one's role. Over time, it has been demonstrated that job performance and success are much more closely linked to EQ. IQ is also regarded as a fixed trait, while EQ is a set of flexibile skills that can be grown over time.

EQ has a proven value for businesses. The fact that it can be grown and enhanced over time implies that businesses are burdened with opportunity cost when not developing a culture that is EQ focused.

### Leadership

Skilled leaders bring out the best in people. Emotional Intelligence is required to accurately understand the matrix of emotions, personality, and events that unfold in the workplace. Leaders who embrace and develop the skills for Emotional Intelligence have the ability to steer this complexity towards a positive and successful outcome.

## Why This Is Important to Us

At thoughtbot, we value human-centric work, and believe that the way we work can always be improved. We want to share what has worked well for us to inspire positive change in our world. We believe that Emotional Intelligence, along with other Diversity and Inclusion efforts, are key to inspiring a world with human-centered values.

Fostering Emotional Intelligence increases our desire to contribute. As adults, its likely that we will spend most of our lives at work. The actions we take, relationships we maintain, and interactions we have, strongly contribute to how our culture is defined and expressed as a whole. When asking ourselves what kind of culture we want to thrive in, what kind of changes we want to see, and what sort of actions we can take to get there, our answers come from our diversity and inclusion efforts, and the integration Emotional Intelligence into workplace culture.

It is our belief that a nurturing, compassionate, and safe environment inspires contribution. A culture of Emotional Intelligence facilitates such an environment by establishing a framework of values to follow. We believe the process of espousing these values will yield continuous opportunities to improve, grow, and positively influence the world around us. This process makes life less stressful, and work more rewarding and enjoyable.

### Consulting Skills

Consulting skills can also fall into that somewhat-intangible and hard-to-define area. Working towards a cultural framework for Emotional Intelligence helps us better define what we value as consultants. We believe that a framework for Emotional Intelligence helps us grow in the following skills:

* Communication
* Transparency
* Building Relationships with Stakeholders
* Building Trust
* Understanding Client Strategy
* Pair Programming
* Difficult Conversations
* Mentorship and Technical Leadership
* Sales
* Networking
* Self Evaluation
* Sharing Values

### The Bottom Line

The benefits of Emotional Intelligence regarding a business' operations and profitability are published and widely discussed. We believe this is not the primary motivator for developing and iterating on a culture of Emotional Intelligence. The "bottom line" for our endeavor is the establishment of a place folks are eager to come and contribute to each day. We are totally stoked that this also increases profits, but the win for us is the increase in the quality of our lives.

## How Might We

thoughtbot is continuously establishing new strategies and techniques to develop our Emotional Intelligence values. We use these to develop our personal EQ, and are always working to uncover more.

### Task Forces

Establishing Diversity and Inclusion Task Forces has allowed individual thoughtbotters to divide the work into smaller, more actionable areas of focus. Many people find this process very rewarding, and that it provides deeper meaning to the work we do. Diversity in collaboration yields new and synthesized strategies.

### NVC

> Our survival as a species depends on our ability to recognize that our well-being and the well-being of others are in fact one in the same.
>
>  -- Marshall B. Rosenberg, PhD, author of Nonviolent Communication

Non Violent Communication, or NVC, provides strategy and tactics for maintaining productive communication and connection under stress. It gifts us with a judgement free solution for reharmonizing with our values, and increases the quality of life in the workplace. Engaging with NVC helps develop Emotional Intelligence.

For more information, check out [the book](https://nonviolentcommunication.com/), or visit the [Center for Non Violent Communication](https://www.cnvc.org/).

### Meditation

This act of self care can clear up internal resources that we need to handle difficult conversations. Meditation can bring us closer to our truest selves, give a deeper insight into our emotions, and allow us to be more present when our emotions may affect our behaviors. Meditation can also help us recover from emotionally challenging situations, and more reliably redirect our behavior towards a successful outcome.

### Science

EQ consists of a set of skills that can be continuously improved. There are physical / neurological changes that take place within the human brain as one develops the underlying personal and social competencies.

Emotional Intelligence is part of what makes us human, as it requires rational thinking and future planning, and anticipation of future outcomes. Information passes through our limbic system, where emotions are processed, before it reaches the front of the brain, where our rational thoughts generate a lot of activity. Developing Emotional Intelligence increases communication between the rational and emotional centers of the brain.

Applying strategies to increase one's Emotional Intelligence allows the neuroplastic properties of the brain to speed up the efficiency of improving the skills in the future. Once the brain has been trained repeatedly to use Emotional Intelligence strategies, the behaviors become habits and reflexes.

### Compassion Challenges

One way a person can further develop Emotional Intelligence is by seeking out ways of helping others that are outside of one's comfort zone. By keeping an eye out for situations where one might feel hesitant to help, a person can create daily opportunities to develop the redirection of uncomfortable emotions to a positive outcome. Helping others tends to increase one's own sense of empathy, further bolstering available resources for future difficult conversations.

### Hiring

We aim to integrate our values from the start of our hiring pipeline.

### Interviews

Occassional interviews about individual people's thoughts and feelings on our EI/EQ efforts can provide new opportunities for improvement.

### Invitation

Maintaining a posture of invitation increases the liklihood of adoption of our values. We belive that the attribution of wrongness, judgement, or fault when sharing our values decreases the liklihood that our intentions are understood. 

We invite you to fork this repository, and contribute.
